+++
title = "Introducing Y2J (Yaml to Json converter)"
date = 2019-07-20
categories = ["Project"]
tags = ["dev", "rust"]
+++

This post is only to present a small project and the reasons behind it.
Hope it can help other people.

Why this project
----------------

I am massively using [jq](https://stedolan.github.io/jq/) in my shell scripts
to deal with APIs. It is a powerfull tool and really help my day to day work.
A few weeks ago I had to do the same kind of operations on a Yaml file, I started
looking out there for alternative, and found some tooling which are translating
Yaml to Json then push it to jq: [here is an example](https://github.com/kislyuk/yq).

I liked the idea, simple and easy, however, it relies on python, and even worse
it has python dependencies. This will bring not only a full python VM (which is
more than 30MB) but also a whole python toolchain to get those dependencies.

All the other solutions where relying on a VM based language and a full set of
dependencies, it was a no-go.

The project
-----------

First, I needed a decision about which language, choices were
Rust, Go, C++, C; all able to provide me with a single binary.
Go was quick to eliminate as I did not want
a 10MB binary for such a simple thing. My C and C++ skills are super rusty (no
pun intended here), and the toolchain is a bit hard to manage.

During my search for a Yaml to Json converter I came
accross [serde](https://github.com/serde-rs/serde). This library seems
to provide everything I need and was all writen in pure Rust.

I ended up plumbing only 10 lines of code:

```rust
extern crate serde_json;
extern crate serde_yaml;
use std::io::{self};

fn main() {
	let value: serde_json::Value = serde_yaml::from_reader(io::stdin()).unwrap();
	// Write out the JSON.
	println!("{}", value.to_string());
}
```

__TADA! It works!__ I did not even have to learn Rust syntax at all.
The only knowledge I had to collect was around the Cargo toolchain, which was
about 30 minutes of Googling. Last but not least, binary is only ~550KB which
was exactly what I was aiming for.

It only support converting in one way and from stdin, but this is the bare minimum
I needed. I may later add some features but for the moment this first version
is really satisfying.
